Stay safe working with portable nuclear gauges
Portable nuclear gauges have sources that
emit radiation.
To work safely with these gauges, here’s
what you need to know.
Preparing and using Portable Nuclear Gauges
Before you start anything, be sure to attach
the dosimeter your employer provided
somewhere between your neck and waist.
If you do not have a dosimeter, you must log
every shot, even practice shots.
If you are approaching 650 shots in a year,
bring it up with your radiation safety officer.
When using the gauge, don’t hover over it
or point it at others while the source is
exposed.
Wait until the gauge is set over the hole
before extending the source rod.
Keep your co-workers and anyone else in the
area at least two meters away from the gauge.
Once it’s set, move away from the gauge.
Once it’s done, retract the source rod from
the ground, and then move the portable gauge.
Gauges must always be under direct supervision,
so if you’re going to lunch or taking a
break the gauge has to be locked safely
and securely.
First, make sure you have the right shipping
documents with you before traveling with a
gauge to or from the job site.
Documents must always be within arm’s reach.
Second, when packing the gauge for transport,
make sure the shutter is fully closed to protect
yourself and the public.
The best practice to check a shutter is with
a radiation survey meter.
A mirror check is a secondary option for checking
the shutter.
Also check that the gauge and transport case
are not damaged.
Once it is in its type A package make sure
the following labels and markings are present
and legible:
- Two properly completed category Yellow-II
labels on opposite sides of the package
- The UN number and proper shipping name next
to each category label
- Consignor ID
- Name of package manufacturer and VRI code
At the end of the day, make sure the gauge
is safely and securely stored.
If the gauge is damaged, lost, stolen or involved
in a transport accident follow your company’s
emergency response procedures and inform the
appropriate persons immediately.
If you can’t reach your RSO call the CNSC
duty officer immediately at 1-844-879-0805
Following these simple steps will help keep
you and others safe when using portable nuclear gauges
For more information on portable gauges or
the CNSC visit our website: nuclearsafety.gc.ca